## AI Usage Disclosure and policy

N.B. This is a policy designed around a project with a small number of contributors. It will likely not scale, but this is something we'll deal with when the time comes. Treat it more like a declaration of how AI is currently used than the mechanism by which outside contributions are judged against.

I strongly believe in clear-cut policies when it comes to AI-assisted programming, with detailed descriptions of the role LLMs play in the project, the scope and bounds of its involvement, and the details of the review process. 

LLMs are used occasionally within this project. Here's how. 

### Guiding principle

The policy is crafted to prevent people from abdicating judgement to AI. If it appears vague at times, it's because I expect people to make judgement calls. I think it'd be silly to create a policy centered on respecting human agency, but make it so strict that a machine can follow it.

### All design decisions are ultimately human-made

This applies, non-exhaustively, to:
- The Project's structure
- The design of the chirp language itself
- The designs underpinning the implementation of the code portions of the project.

Using LLMs as a brainstorming tool to populate a pool of design ideas can happen, but the *decision* has to be made by a human. And that human must be ready to defend the idea by themselves with the same level of confidence as if they came up with it.

### LLMs are (sometimes) used to *realize* designs

The rule: For any block of code, the human author associated to it MUST be able to explain that code as if they had written it. If you want to contribute to this project but are intimidated by that, reduce the scope of your contribution until you can. I will **not** budge on this.

> [!NOTE]
> Counterintuitively, this means that in-code comments pointing out that a block of code was AI-generated are **explicitly** disallowed from the codebase.
> If you submit code to this repo, I will treat it as if you wrote it. End of story. 

In practice, I use the following set of constraints to achieve that, and would encourage everyone to follow along:

- I must have at the very least **an** expected general shape and structure of the code generated by a prompt before prompting. If I don't have at least a baseline expectation about what's going to be generated, I don't bother prompting for it.
  - If the code matches what I expected, it still has to be manually reviewed for correctness/safety.
  - If the code is different than the expectation, the structure itself must be fully understood, reviewed and agreed as an improvement over the baseline before proceeding.
- LLM usage when writing tests must be done with extra care and oversight. 
  - LLMs are good at churning through boilerplate. Test suites are a natural fit for that. Disallowing them here would be unreasonable.
  - Large test suites are some of the most boring and tedious chunks of code to review, but it still HAS to be done, no matter how tempting it is to handwave that away.
  - However, using LLMs to **identify** missed edge-cases and deficiencies in test suites is highly encouraged.

Limiting the scope of a given prompt is *encouraged* as a way to make following these rules easier, but that's left to the dev's discretion.

### LLMs are (sometimes) used as a review tool

This applies both to designs and code. When asking an LLM to identify issues, gaps, oversights etc, the same principles as design decisions apply. Accepting an LLM's feedback requires understanding it to the same level as if it came from you.

### Prose is human

I will fully acknowledge that this section is mostly stylistic preference on my part, and not based on any engineering requirements. The design and details of chirp are deeply rooted in my ideas, experiences, and convictions. I want the documentation to reflect that it comes from the contributors, and the functional-but-soulless prose that comes out of LLMs as of today just doesn't cut it on that front.

Using LLMs to author formal dry technical documentation is *fine*, as long as the rules for code (pre-prompt expectations, review, etc...) are respected. However, prosaic documentation, like this README, **must** always be human-authored. LLMs can be used for reviewing, suggestions, correcting typos, etc... But the text itself **must** have been manually authored. 

What does "dry" mean? Use your judgement! The lexical and grammar parts of the spec are heavily AI-assisted because they are mostly mechanistic. The derivation is pure me because its presented as a narrative. Both are part of the spec, but have different standards applied to them by virtue of their nature, not any hard rule.

### Copyright & IP Good Faith

I am well aware of the IP risks that come with using LLMs. This is exactly why this policy exists, and why I enforce the rule that if you submit code here, I will treat it as if you wrote it.

That being said, human review isn't infallible. Just as a developer might accidentally recreate something they saw in a proprietary codebase years ago, it is possible for a mistake to slip past our sanity checks. Because of this, I am also committed to following the industry's best practices (within the scope of what's reasonable for the project at any given stage) when it comes to preventing and intercepting LLM-driven copyright infringements.

If you are an IP holder and believe any code in this repository infringes on your copyright, please open an issue so I can promptly investigate, audit, and rewrite (if appropriate) the offending code.  
